upsetting experiences aren't just
uncomfortable they often feel traumatic
as BPD expert Marsha linahan describes
it quote they're like people with third
degree burns over 90% of their bodies
lacking emotional skin they feel Agony
at the slightest touch end quote
splitting helps contain the devastation
and Pain by separating parts of the self
into isolated containers sort of like
siloed parts of the self internal
communication between between these
parts is often limited such divisions or
splits in the personality protect the
person from being overwhelmed by trauma
Bound images of the self and other
people splitting is remarkably effective
but it's also costly it's an defense
that we all use in early childhood it
allows us to preserve self-esteem and to
protect important attachment
Relationships by keeping the bad
separate from the good we avoid the
anxiety or confusion that comes from
recognizing both positive and negative
traits in ourselves or other people
before we have the ego function to
balance these
contradictions over time most people
integrate positive and negative feelings
into a cohesive whole but in borderline
organizations this ability is not
reliably developed often due to Chronic
relational trauma or adverse childhood
experiences